---
layout: post
title:  "Getting started with Python"
categories: Lecture notes
---

A quick upgrade
---------------

IPython is a user-friendly interface to Python which we'll be
using. Unfortunately, the version of IPython which comes with your
laptop is a little out of date, so we'll need to update it. Open up a
terminal and type:

```
sudo pip install "ipython[notebook]" --upgrade
```

and press the return (enter) key. If you are asked for a password,
enter your laptop user account password. You should see a number of
packages install over the network.


<div class="note">
That command was a bit magical. We can unpack the magic a little:

* `sudo` means "run the rest of this command as a command run by the administrator.
* `pip` is the Python package manager.
* `install` is what we're asking the package manager to do.
* `"ipython[notebook]"` is what we'd like installed: IPython including
  the IPython notebook extensions.
* `--upgrade` is an option to `pip install` which tells pip to install
  newer versions of packages even if we already have a version.
</div>

Getting set up to work
----------------------

The initial lectures are in IPython notebook format. To get started,
you need to clone the git repository for this course. Open up a
terminal on your laptop.

Let's create a directory (folder) in which to keep the code we're
going to work on. You'll also keep more code in here during the core
modules, and during your project work if you work on a computational
project. The traditional name for a source code directory in the Linux
world is `src`, so we type:

```
mkdir src
```

This means "make a directory called `src`. You can list the contents
of the current directory by typing:

```
ls
```

You should see a list of files and directories (which were put there
automatically when your laptop was set up), and `src` should be among
them.

Let's move into the `src` directory:

```
cd src
```

(`cd` stands for change directory). We can check which directory we're currently in with:

```
pwd
```

(print working directory). You should see something like
`/home/dham/src`. Of course you're going to see your username, rather
than `dham`.


<div class="note">
What's with all the stupid abbreviations?
-----------------------------------------

The Unix shell, which is the thing you're typing commands into, is a
typing based interface. Back in the '70s when this was all invented,
that probably meant a teleprinter (basically a keyboard and a
printer). Typing was slow and error-prone, so the use of very short
abbreviations was common both for the commands (which you don't get to
choose) and for file and directory names, which you do.

Using the standard names which are used in Linux (and Unix more
generally) makes it easier to understand the work of other people,
because everyone is speaking the same language.
</div>

<div class="stop">
We'll walk through the next section together, so
when you get here, stop and stick your green post-it to your laptop.
</div>

You can f**k off right now!
---------------------------

The Python exercises are stored in a git repository on GitHub. I'll be
updating them and (hopefully not too often) fixing bugs as we go. Of
course, being good scientists, you'll want to commit the changes you
make as you go along as well. This gives you a great opportunity to
practice your newly acquired git skills.

Those of you with a smutty mind may have thought that the title is a
bit rude. What's actually going on is that you're each going to need
your own copy of the GitHub repository to push your own changes
to. This sort of copy is called a **fork**.

<div class="note"> You might choose to hold the control key while
clicking the next two links so that they open in a new tab and this
page stays open.
</div>

1. Head off to [GitHub](https://github.com) and make sure you're
   logged in with the account you created.
2. Navigate to
   [https://github.com/mpecdt/Introduction-to-Python-programming-for-MPECDT]
   and click on the "Fork" button at the top right.

Now you've got your own fork of the Python course, and you can see
that because the title of repository at the top of your screen will
now be:
`username/https://github.com/mpecdt/Introduction-to-Python-programming-for-MPECDT`,
but with your GitHub username first.

Obtaining a local clone
-----------------------

Now we're back in the territory of what we've already learned about
GitHub. You need to go to your fork page. On the lower right is a box
with the clone URL. Make sure you have the `https` URL - if not then
click on the `HTTPS` link (if you already set up SSH keys on GitHub
then you can use SSH instead). CLick on the little clipboard logo to
copy the URL.

Next, in the terminal type the following, with a space after it, but **don't press return**:

```
git clone
```

Then paste the URL you just copied by pressing `ctrl + shift + v`
(clicking with the middle mouse button also pastes). Press return and
you should see the repository being cloned. Type:

```
ls
```

and you should see `Introduction-to-Python-programming-for-MPECDT`.

<div class="note">
We're about to use the tab key to avoid a lot of
inconvenient typing. Play close attention to this, because it's a very
useful trick which also works in the IPython shell.
</div>

We need to get into that directory to do some work type:

```
cd I
```

now press the `tab` key. The shell should autocomplete the directory
name for you, so you can press return and get into the directory.

Now you're in there, we actually want to be in the `notebook`
subdirectory, which is where the IPython notebooks will be.

```
cd notebook
```

Just to remind yourself of which folder you're now in, type:

```
pwd
```


Finally, some Python
--------------------

That was a bit of a saga, but it's actually just what you do when
setting up a new project. Day to day working in a revision control
system is much, much simpler than that.

We are now in a position to actually run the first IPython notebook
and do some Python work:

```
ipython notebook Python-1.ipynb
```

<div class="note">
That line is another good use for `tab` completion!
</div>

The IPython notebook will appear in your web browser. We're going to
do a lot of our work over there now, but come back here at the end of
the session.


Finishing and committing
------------------------

At the end of the session, you'll have a modified version of the notebook file. Type:

```
git status
```

and you'll probably see something like:

```
On branch master
Your branch is up-to-date with 'origin/master'.
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git checkout -- <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)

	modified:   Python-1.ipynb

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)

	.ipynb_checkpoints/

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
```

So we'll want to commit our changes, and push the result back to GitHub for safety. Write:

```
git add Python-1.ipdb
git commit -m "first day's work"
git push
```

<div class="note">
It's impossible to say this enough: **commit early
and commit often**. Constant, small commits of everything you ever work
on are essential to productive, reliable computational science. You
should be committing several times per day when working on code or on
a report or paper.

Pushing to the remote repository is essential to protect your data
from disk failures and lost or stolen laptops: you should feel very
nervous about leaving the office for the day without pushing: indeed,
the safest policy is to push every time you commit.
</div>
